So this one was a little challenging,
I think in part due to a poor example for
me here in the timelines.
So I'd like to go ahead and
kind of do that again.
There's a lot of information on the screen
and unfortunately it didn't carry over
particularly well with some of
the constraints I have on the projector.
So, I ran another timeline
here with some of
my screens rearranged here a little bit,
and
I think it makes for a clearer picture.
So, I can go ahead and zoom in.
If you look in the upper third graph,
the upper third graph shows us
very high level information about
what's happening in the frames per
second what it takes to render the page.
The amount of CPU time being consumed,
network activity and memory heap size.
But it doesn't actually show you any
more information as you get closer.
It is a useful navigation tool.
You can use it to like select and
zoom in on particular areas.
Now the middle sections, which I have
exploded way out considerably larger,
shows us the details of network requests.
And then what JavaScript execution points
are actually running at that point.
So, in my capture here, there's one big
tick up here in the JavaScript heap.
And so that's where I want to zoom in.
So, once I have selected a relevant area,
I can put the focus by simply
clicking in this middle area.
And navigate in further using the key
commands WASD on the keyboard.
W zoom in, S zoom out,
A strafe left, D strafe right.
So using that we can zoom in more and more
and more on this memory heap increase and
trying to understand better
what exactly is causing it.
And as we continue to zoom in more and
more and
more, we see that this tick was actually
two different things that happened.
We see a timer being fired,
a JavaScript timer being fired.
That calls down through a whole
bunch of different functions,
most of them being framework code.
What's interesting is way down
here at the bottom is a blue box.
That blue box indicates that this function
increased the JavaScript heap size,
this operation.
And this operation was
a send request to /api/ads.
We can then see here in the network tab
above, that a network request was fired
at this time and took this gap between
these two stacks of functions for
it to process the server communication.
When it came back,
we see another stack of activity.
We see a couple more things that
increase the memory heap size by
grabbing the response
payload from the server.
And just the act of grabbing
that XHR off the wire.
And this was processed by some
more JavaScript functions.
A lot of it's jQuery anonymous functions,
a bunch of jQuery GUI we probably
don't care so much about.
But if we scroll down,
eventually we get to some things
that look a little familiar.
We see a function called render,
which is a normal thing in my code.
We see collection.each and
renderAd and render, and
a whole bunch of other things that look
like code function names that I wrote.
And all of these exist inside of stacks
that increase the memory heap size.
And so that's why these
are good symptoms to look at.
Because these things, as part of their
operations, either directly increase
the memory size or call other functions
that increase the memory size.
So I'm going to click on this one and
use it as a starting point.
Once you've selected any one of
these frames here, the summary
tab on the bottom of your screen
will show more information about it.
Specifically, how long did it take for
that function to run for
its own execution, and how long did it
take for all the downstream functions?
I'm just using this
right now as pointer so
that I can easily navigate
to adlistviewjs, line 38.
When you do this navigation,
the Sources view is enhanced a little bit
with the information from your timeline.
So execution times are actually printed
in this column right to the left.
So I can see that this particular
call to this.el.innerHTML,
this empty string took 0.4 milliseconds.
It printed this because this was
a non trivial amount of time for
it to execute this operation.
This is actually kind of
an expensive operation on its own.
And if we didn't only have to do it once,
we might consider this
a performance optimization.
But that's not really
the cause of our memory leak.
Let's take a look at this code,
see if we can find out what
might be leaking out of this.
So we have an object here called
AdListView that is responsible for
dealing with our ads supposedly.
Now, the render function and
the render ad function
featured prominently in our
performance stack trace.
So we see that when render is called,
we clear out the contents of an element.
And then we loop over a collection and for
each thing in that collection
we call renderAd on it.
RrenderAd itself creates a new
object called an AdView.
And sticks some contents from
that into a parent element and
then saves it in this object
called this.children.
Which just by highlighting,
it looks like it's just a simple
array here at the top of the file.
So every so often render fires for
each item in the collection,
it calls renderAd and
renderAd creates some new things.
We can go ahead and
attach our debugger and
see if we can understand more
of what's happening here.
So I'm just gonna place
a break point there.
And then if I wait a few seconds here,
I should actually catch something.
We've landed on this render function, and
we can see the contents of el,
el is if you look on the left hand
side of my screen by mousing over
an HTML element that is in the DOM.
Chrome will actually highlight in the DOM.
So we can see this.el is that box on
the right hand side of my viewable
screen that has ads for Russian getaway
vacations and gold plated bathtubs.
We clear it out, we go through
a collection which looks to contain
three things, and render each one of them.
Let's take a look at one of
them that's being rendered.
I'll set a break point here on line 47,
side of the renderAd function and
let this run.
When I catch renderAd, I see an ad object.
It contains some things in it,
looks like a reference to
a URL and an image URL or
an image path and some junk.
So we would create a new view off of it.
And then we're going to render
some contents into the element,
and then we're going to
push it into children.
Well, what's in children?
At this point, because my page has
been operating for a little while,
children contain 252 ads.
252 ads have attempted to
be rendered on this page.
Now what's missing in this whole operation
is that we never remove any children.
And so every ad that has ever been
attempted to be run is still on the page.
There are thousands of shirtless pictures
of Vladimir Putin hanging about,
but you can't see them because
we're just hanging on to
references to all of these
inside of the children array.
And it doesn't appear that
there's any reason to
keep them around after we've
cleared out our innerHTML.
Once they're not visible anymore,
why should we even have them?
And so I think we just need to do
a little bit of our own cleanup code,
our own like force some garbage collection
to happen, here when we're cleaning it up.
So that first line where we're
zeroing out the innerHTML,
that'd be a good place to drop
anything else that we have.
And so maybe what we should do is say,
this.children,
which we know is an array,
we can use some new JavaScripty stuff.
And so we'll do a forEach loop around it.
So let's perform
an operation to each child.
And maybe we'll say child.remove.
Yeah.
Delete the child.
And then we need to actually let
go of them from the array itself.
Now, we've all seen that arrays have
a property on them called length.
And you use that length property as a way
to see how many things are in an array.
JavaScript is weird.
And you can use that length property
to clear out an array as well.
By setting an array's length to 0,
you actually zero out the array.
Or you can create,
I imagine there's use cases to set
the length to other things too.
But the only use case I've ever
found with this handy little feature
is zeroing out an array.
By doing this, if we grab this
again after we saved, the next
time this code executes which should
be in some point less than 10 seconds.
So, at this point children
contained 288 pictures
of Vladimir Putin, we're going to
loop over it and do an operation.
Before we execute, we have 288 things,
now we have 0 things.
We've dropped our only reference to it and
now we are at the whim of Chrome's
garbage collector, but the next time
a garbage collection event has happened
they should all get cleaned up.
>> I've got a question.
>> Yeah.
>> The for each loop then,
what was that doing as opposed
to the children.length equals 0?
>> Technically, I think we could
probably have gotten away with that.
>> Okay.
>> The forEach loop is
elsewhere in the code.
It talks about deleting or calling remove
on views to like clean up themselves,
but that's probably a confusing
aspect that should be dropped.
We probably just get away with that.
>> Could you also just reset
this.children to an empty array?
>> We could.
It's, I believe,
slightly more expensive, but it's fine.
The question was, could you just reset
the children array to be a new array?
And yes, you could.
That would also be perfectly viable.
Now, we don't know that we fixed the
memory leak until we run another profile.
So let's go back to the profiles and
you'll notice that our
snapshot from before is still there
even though we've done a bunch of stuff.
I've reloaded the page several times,
I've run other tools.
And you can even save your snapshots off,
save them to disk.
You could store them and
put them in your code repository.
So you can understand how
does your memory profile look
at different stages in
your development cycle?
You could compare, what is your memory
profile look like each iteration,
each week, each month, each release, each
whatever time period makes sense to you.
Because this is a fairly
trivialized example.
In real applications, there's going to
be lots and lots of things running in
parallel and you won't always know
which one caused the leak to occur.
For our example,
we've made one change here.
Here's our original snapshot where
we can see every ten seconds
about 100k getting allocated and
50k getting retained.
I'm going to run another snapshot,
which will just be done here below.
I'm also going to run it for
about 30, 35 seconds or so, so
we have about the same amount
of time to compare it to.
For the first comparison,
I saw it jump up about 50K and
now it is dropped significantly below 50K.
We're looking at about
10K still being retained.
Now let's go one more cycling and
we'll stop it.
All right, so
as a reminder on how to read this.
This top chart is showing you each time
your JavaScript application
allocates memory from the system.
Each time it asks for new memory from
the heap, it's going to show a line.
If that line is still shown in blue,
it means that your application is
still holding on to that memory.
There's still something
being used in that memory.
If it's gray, it means it's been released,
which means you did need that memory at
one point, but you're no longer using it.
And so that's usually fine.
Now what we see here,
if we compare these two snapshots,
the one that we had before
would allocate about 100k and
retain about 50k every cycle.
And in the new one, we're allocating about
100K, we're only retaining about 10.
Some of that is just going to be
due to Chrome's garbage collector.
Cuz it's not always the most efficient.
If we were to let this run for
five minutes or so, most of this
would actually get cleaned up.
But there may be another subtle
memory leak somewhere in here.
Using this for your application can help
you point out whether or not, over longer
periods of time, memory is still being
retained from your applications.
So this was a trivial memory bug and
we looked at it unreleased objects.
Specifically, we
are creating a lot of things
as part of cycling our advertisements and
we weren't like clearing them out.
We didn't actually like drop
all of our references to them
when we were done with them.
And this is one of the biggest sources
of memory leaks that I've seen,
is you're creating some part
of like dynamic elements.
Some dynamic visualization in your UI but
you're not always getting rid
of it when you're done with it.
You need to make sure you drop every
reference to it, even in EventHandlers or
Callbacks or anything like that, so
that when the Chrome garbage collector
comes along, it will let it go.
Specifically, there's two tools
that help you to understand this.
The Profiler is more helpful to understand
whether or not a memory leak is occurring.
And then if you believe there is,
you can use the timeline to try and
understand where.